kie-kogito-serverless-operator-459: Restructuring of the Cloud -> Operator -> Persistence chapter (#628)
apache/incubator-kie-kogito-docs: serverlessworkflow/modules/ROOT/pages/cloud/operator/using-persistence.adoc

= Using persistence in {product_name} workflows
:compat-mode!:
// Metadata:
:description: Using persistence in the workflow instance to store its context
:keywords: sonataflow, workflow, serverless, operator, kubernetes, persistence

> This document describes how to configure a SonataFlow instance to use persistence and store the workflow context in a relational database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document describes how to configure a `SonataFlow` instance to use persistence and store the workflow context in a relational database.
```

Kubernetes's pods are stateless by definition. In some scenarios, this can be a challenge for workloads that require maintaining the status of 
the application regardless of the pod's lifecycle. In the case of {product_name}, by default, the context of the workflow is lost when the pod restarts.

If your workflow requires recovery from such scenarios, you must provide additional configuration to enable the xref:persistence/core-concepts.adoc#_workflow_runtime_persistence[Workflow Runtime Persistence].

> That configuration must be provided by using the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflowplatform_cr, SonataFlowPlatform CR>> or the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, SonataFlow CR>>, and has different scopes depending on each case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That configuration must be provided by using the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflowplatform_cr, `SonataFlowPlatform` CR>> or the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, `SonataFlow` CR>>, and has different scopes depending on each case.
```

== Configuring the persistence using the SonataFlowPlatform CR

> The SonataFlowPlatform CR facilitates the configuration of the persistence with namespace scope. It means that it will be automatically applied to all the workflows deployed in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SonataFlowPlatform` CR facilitates the configuration of the persistence with namespace scope. It means that it will be automatically applied to all the workflows deployed in
```

that namespace. This can be useful to reduce the amount resources to configure, for example, in cases where the workflows deployed in that namespace belongs to the same application, etc.

> That decision is left to each particular use case, however, it's important to know, that this configuration can be overridden by any workflow in that namespace by using the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, SonataFlow CR>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That decision is left to each particular use case, however, it's important to know, that this configuration can be overridden by any workflow in that namespace by using the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, `SonataFlow` CR>>.
```

[NOTE]
====

> Persistence configurations are applied at workflow deployment time, and potential changes in the SonataFlowPlatform will not impact already deployed workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Persistence configurations are applied at workflow deployment time, and potential changes in the `SonataFlowPlatform` will not impact already deployed workflows.
```

is this true? During the platform reconciliation, we do update the persistence configuration. So in case the pod restarts, so it will be the persistence values.

Author: Good catch, I didn't know it was expected to work this way, so this is why I added this note as a warning.

So, I did some tests and it looks like it works more or less this way:
 
I have changed for example the SFP platform persistence, and it looks like the DI, the JS, and the workflow are all restarted. (I mean, not in case the pod restarts, it was forced too restart)

However, we have an issue :angry: with the jobs-service in that case.

The job-service has two database connections:

One connection string, is passed as an env var `QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_JDBC_URL` in the Deployment.
All good, this connection is updated as part of the restart I commented above.

The second connection string, is passed in the jobs-service-properties config map :angry: , with a property `quarkus.datasource.reactive.url`. (IDK why it was done this way)

But the config map is not updated as part of the restart procedure.  So, the JS restart, is not working well  :angry:, since the connection passed as env var points to the new database (was refreshed as part of the restart procedure), and the connection passed in the jobs-service-config map points to the old-one (not refreshed as part of the procedure). :angry: 

While not a blocker, we can't say that this sort of casecade update is working 100% well.

So, I have opened an issue for this situation: https://github.com/apache/incubator-kie-kogito-serverless-operator/issues/468

Alternatives here:

1) we update the documentation saying that this automatic restart/refresh exists, and immediately add a know issue saying that it's not working.

2) we let the documentation as is to not confuse people.

@domhanak @ricardozanini

====

> To configure the persistence you must use the `persistence` field in the SonataFlowPlatform CR `spec`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the persistence you must use the `persistence` field in the `SonataFlowPlatform` CR `spec`:
```

  persistence:
    postgresql:
      secretRef:
        name: postgres-secrets <1>
        userKey: POSTGRESQL_USER <2>
        passwordKey: POSTGRESQL_PASSWORD <3>
      serviceRef:
        name: postgres <4>
        namespace: sonataflow-infra <5>
        databaseName: sonataflow <6>
        port: 1234 <7>
----

<1> Name of the link:{k8n_secrets_url}[Kubernetes Secret] containing the username and password to connect with the database.
<2> Name of the link:{k8n_secrets_url}[Kubernetes Secret] `key` containing the username to connect with the database.
<3> Name of the link:{k8n_secrets_url}[Kubernetes Secret] `key` containing the password to connect with the database.
<4> Name of the Kubernetes Service to connect with the PostgreSQL database server.

> <5> (Optional) Kubernetes namespace containing the PostgreSQL Service. Defaults to the SonataFlowPlatform's local namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<5> (Optional) Kubernetes namespace containing the PostgreSQL Service. Defaults to the `SonataFlowPlatform`'s local namespace.
```

<6> Name of the PostgreSQL database to store the workflow's data.
<7> (Optional) Port number to connect with the PostgreSQL Service. Defaults to 5432.

> This configuration signals the operator that every workflow deployed in current SonataFlowPlatform's namespace must be properly configured to connect with that PostgreSQL database server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This configuration signals the operator that every workflow deployed in the current `SonataFlowPlatform`'s namespace must be properly configured to connect with that PostgreSQL database server.
```

> This configuration signals the operator that the every workflow deployed in current SonataFlowPlatform's namespace must be properly configured to connect with that PostgreSQL database server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This configuration signals the operator that every workflow deployed in current SonataFlowPlatform's namespace must be properly configured to connect with that PostgreSQL database server.
```

And the operator will add the relevant JDBC connection parameters in the form of environment variables to the workflow container.

> Additionally, for SonataFlow CR deployments that use the `preview` profile, it will configure the {product_name} build system to include specific Quarkus extensions required for persistence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, for `SonataFlow` CR deployments that use the `preview` profile, it will configure the {product_name} build system to include specific Quarkus extensions required for persistence.
```

[NOTE]
====
Currently, PostgreSQL is the only supported persistence.
====

> Below you can see an example of the configurations produced for a workflow with the name `example-workflow`, that was deployed using the previous SonataFlowPlatform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below you can see an example of the configurations produced for a workflow with the name `example-workflow`, that was deployed using the previous `SonataFlowPlatform`.
```

For simplicity, only the `env` configurations related to the persistence has been included. These operator managed configurations are immutable.

[#persistence_env_vars_config_example]
.Generated persistence `env` configurations in the workflow container
[source,yaml,subs="attributes+"]
----
      env:
        - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_USERNAME
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: postgres-secrets
              key: POSTGRESQL_USER
        - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD
          valueFrom:
            secretKeyRef:
              name: postgres-secrets
              key: POSTGRESQL_PASSWORD
        - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_DB_KIND
          value: postgresql
        - name: QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_JDBC_URL
          value: >-
            jdbc:postgresql://postgres.sonataflow-infra:1234/sonataflow?currentSchema=example-workflow
        - name: KOGITO_PERSISTENCE_TYPE
          value: jdbc
----

[IMPORTANT]
====

> When you use the SonataFlowPlatform persistence, every workflow is configured to use a PostgreSQL schema name equal to the workflow name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use the `SonataFlowPlatform` persistence, every workflow is configured to use a PostgreSQL schema name equal to the workflow name.
```

====

To learn how to initialize the database schema see: <<_database_schema_initialization, Database schema initialization>>.

== Configuring the persistence using the SonataFlow CR

> The SonataFlow CR facilitates the configuration of the persistence with workflow scope, and you can use it independently if the SonataFlowPlatform persistence was already configured in the current namespace, see: <<_persistence_configuration_precedence_rules, Persistence configuration precedence rules>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `SonataFlow` CR facilitates the configuration of the persistence with workflow scope, and you can use it independently if the `SonataFlowPlatform` persistence was already configured in the current namespace, see: <<_persistence_configuration_precedence_rules, Persistence configuration precedence rules>>.
```

> To configure the persistence, you must use the `persistence` field in the SonataFlow CR `spec`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To configure the persistence, you must use the `persistence` field in the `SonataFlow` CR `spec`:
```

      serviceRef:
        name: postgres <4>
        namespace: sonataflow-infra <5>
        databaseName: sonataflow <6>
        databaseSchema: my-example-schema <7>
        port: 1234 <8>
  flow:
     ...
----

<1> Name of the link:{k8n_secrets_url}[Kubernetes Secret] containing the username and password to connect with the database.
<2> Name of the link:{k8n_secrets_url}[Kubernetes Secret] `key` containing the username to connect with the database.
<3> Name of the link:{k8n_secrets_url}[Kubernetes Secret] `key` containing the password to connect with the database.
<4> Name of the Kubernetes Service to connect with the PostgreSQL database server.
<5> (Optional) Kubernetes namespace containing the PostgreSQL Service. Defaults to the workflow's local namespace.
<6> Name of the PostgreSQL database to store the workflow's data.
<7> (Optional) Name of the database schema to store workflow's data. Defaults to the workflow's name.
<8> (Optional) Port number to connect with the PostgreSQL Service. Defaults to 5432.

This configuration signals the operator that the current workflow must be properly configured to connect with that PostgreSQL database server when deployed.

> Similar to the SonataFlowPlatform persistence, the operator will add the relevant JDBC connection parameters in the form of <<persistence_env_vars_config_example, environment variables>> to the workflow container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the `SonataFlowPlatform` persistence, the operator will add the relevant JDBC connection parameters in the form of <<persistence_env_vars_config_example, environment variables>> to the workflow container.
```

> Additionally, for SonataFlow CR deployments that use the `preview` profile, it can configure the {product_name} build system to include specific Quarkus extensions required for persistence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, for `SonataFlow` CR deployments that use the `preview` profile, it can configure the {product_name} build system to include specific Quarkus extensions required for persistence.
```

[NOTE]
====
Currently, PostgreSQL is the only supported persistence.
====

To learn how to initialize the database schema see: <<_database_schema_initialization, Database schema initialization>>.

== Persistence configuration precedence rules

> <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, SonataFlow CR persistence>> can be used with or without the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflowplatform_cr, SonataFlowPlatform CR persistence>>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, `SonataFlow` CR persistence>> can be used with or without the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflowplatform_cr, `SonataFlowPlatform` CR persistence>>.
```

> And, if the current namespace has an already configured <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflowplatform_cr, SonataFlowPlatform CR persistence>>, the following rules apply:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And, if the current namespace has an already configured <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflowplatform_cr, `SonataFlowPlatform` CR persistence>>, the following rules apply:
```

> * If the SonataFlow CR has a configured persistence, that configuration will apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the `SonataFlow` CR has a configured persistence, that configuration will apply.
```

> * If the SonataFlow CR has no configured persistence, i.e., the field `spec.persistence` is not present at all, the persistence configuration will be taken from the current platform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If the `SonataFlow` CR has no configured persistence, i.e., the field `spec.persistence` is not present at all, the persistence configuration will be taken from the current platform.
```

> * If you don't want the current workflow to use persistence, you must use the following configuration in the SonataFlow CR: `spec.persistence : {}` to ban the SonataFlowPlatform persistence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* If you don't want the current workflow to use `persistence`, you must use the following configuration in the SonataFlow CR: `spec.persistence : {}` to ignore the `SonataFlowPlatform` persistence configuration.
```

> * If you don't want that the current workflow use persistence, you must use the following configuration in the SonataFlow CR: `spec.persistence : {}` to ban the SonataFlowPlatform persistence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If you don't want the current workflow to use persistence, you must use the following configuration in the SonataFlow CR: `spec.persistence : {}` to ban the SonataFlowPlatform persistence.
```

== Persistence configuration and SonataFlow profiles

> All the configurations shown in this guide apply exactly the same for both the `preview` and the `gitops` profiles, however, you must not use them when you use the `dev` profile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All the configurations shown in this guide apply exactly the same for both the `preview` and the `gitops` profiles. These configurations are ignored and you must not use them in the`dev` profile.
```

Finally, the only distinction between `preview` and `gitops` profiles, is that when you use the `gitops` profile, the following Quarkus extensions must be added when you build your workflow image.

[cols="40%,40%,20%", options="header"]
|===
|groupId
|artifactId
|version

| {groupId_quarkus-agroal}
| {artifactId_quarkus-agroal}
| {quarkus_version}

| {groupId_quarkus-jdbc-postgresql}
| {artifactId_quarkus-jdbc-postgresql}
| {quarkus_version}

| {groupId_kie-addons-quarkus-persistence-jdbc}
| {artifactId_kie-addons-quarkus-persistence-jdbc}
| {kogito_version}
|===

This last can be done by passing the following build argument to the `kogito-swf-builder`:

[source,bash,subs="attributes+"]
----

> QUARKUS_EXTENSIONS={groupId_quarkus-agroal}:{artifactId_quarkus-agroal}:{quarkus_version},{groupId_quarkus-jdbc-postgresql}:{artifactId_quarkus-jdbc-postgresql}:{quarkus_version},{groupId_kie-addons-quarkus-persistence-jdbc}:{artifactId_kie-addons-quarkus-persistence-jdbc}:{kogito_version}

Reviewer: Can't we configure the platform `.spec.build.template` with this information? Or even better, don't we already add these extensions in the `preview` profile? Maybe redirecting the user to the guide that teaches how to modify the builder image?

Author: @ricardozanini  yes, in the `preview`  we already ad them, so the guide here tries to say.

For `dev`never include.

For `preview`, do nothing. (we automatically inject these  extensions at build time, this is the development I did)

For `gitops` you must add them by your self whey you build the WF, because we can't handle the image build in that case.

Not sure if this clarifies?

----

== Database schema initialization

> When you use the SonataFlow PostgreSQL persistence, you can either opt to use Flyway to produce the database initialization, or manually upgrade your database via DDL scripts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you use the `SonataFlow` PostgreSQL persistence, you can either opt to use Flyway to produce the database initialization, or manually upgrade your database via DDL scripts.
```

=== Flyway managed database initialization

To enable Flyway you must use any of the following configuration procedures:

[NOTE]
====
The Flyway schema initialization is disabled by default.
====

=== Flyway configuration by using the workflow ConfigMap

Add the following property to your workflow ConfigMap.

.Example of enabling Flyway by using the workflow ConfigMap
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: v1
kind: ConfigMap
metadata:
  labels:
    app: example-workflow
  name: example-workflow-props
data:
  application.properties: |
    quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start = true
----

=== Flyway configuration by using the workflow container env vars

> Add the following `env` var in the  `spec.podTemplate.container` of the SonataFlow CR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following `env` var in the  `spec.podTemplate.container` of the `SonataFlow` CR.
```

.Example of enabling Flyway by using the workflow container env vars
[source, yaml]
----
apiVersion: sonataflow.org/v1alpha08
kind: SonataFlow
metadata:
  name: example-workflow
  annotations:
    sonataflow.org/description: Example Workflow
    sonataflow.org/version: 0.0.1
spec:
  podTemplate:
    container:
      env:
        - name: QUARKUS_FLYWAY_MIGRATE_AT_START
          value: 'true'
  flow: ...
----

=== Flyway configuration by using SonataFlowPlatForm properties

> To apply a common Flyway configuration to all the workflows in a given namespace, you can use the `spec.properties` of the SonataFlowPlatform in that namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply a common Flyway configuration to all the workflows in a given namespace, you can use the `spec.properties` of the `SonataFlowPlatform` in that namespace.
```

.Example of enabling Flyway by using the SonataFlowPlatform properties.
[source,yaml]
----
apiVersion: sonataflow.org/v1alpha08
kind: SonataFlowPlatform
metadata:
  name: sonataflow-platform
spec:
  properties:
    - name: quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start
      value: true
----

[NOTE]
====
The configuration above takes effect at workflow deployment time, so you must be sure that property is configured before you deploy your workflows.
====

=== Manual database initialization by using DDL

To initialize the database schema manually, you must be sure that the following application property `quarkus.flyway.migrate-at-start` is not configured, or is set to `false`, and follow this xref:use-cases/advanced-developer-use-cases/persistence/postgresql-flyway-migration.adoc#manually-executing-scripts[procedure].

[NOTE]
====
Remember that:

* By default, every workflow is configured use a schema name equal to the workflow name, and thus, that manual initialization must be applied for every workflow.

> * When you use the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, SonataFlow CR persistence configuration>> it is possible to use the schema name of your choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* When you use the <<_configuring_the_persistence_using_the_sonataflow_cr, `SonataFlow` CR persistence configuration>> it is possible to use the schema name of your choice.
```
